#+TITLE: Anime review: Planetes
#+AUTHOR: pecan
#+DATE: 2025-09-10
#+BLOG_TAGS: review anime

* I.
/Planetes/ is a Greek word meaning ‘wanderer’; as one might expect it is also the source of the word ‘planet’—wandering
stars.

The etymology of /planetes/ itself is somewhat obscure; most likely it derives from the Proto‑Indo‑European /*pleh₂/
referring to wide, flat areas. This would, circuitously, make it cognate with the modern English word ‘floor’ via
Proto‑Germanic /*flōraz/ meaning floor or ground.

Which is to say, Planetes is a very grounded anime.

This is, of course, just a bit of etymological sleight of hand. But the point remains true: Planetes takes an inherently
speculative premise and (ironically for a show about space) handles it in an extremely down-to-earth way. The technology
is all very well-researched but even more than that the social and political factors and motivations for space
development are all throughly explored and never once did I think poorly justified or unrealistic. It feels all the more
prescient considering the show aired in 2003-2004, shortly after the beginning of the ISS era and well before the
current age of private space companies such as SpaceX, Axiom Space, Varda Space Industries, etc, many of which are
literally working on the things in the show and it’s not at all hard to imagine a corporation like Technora (the main
corporation in Planetes) developing out of the current private space landscape.

#+CAPTION: Commitment to realism: they’re still using IPv4 in 2076
[[./img/ipv4.png]]

This is done so effectively that the Planetes world essentially just feels like a logical extension of our world, and it
does a good job of emulating the same scale. In spite of focusing on a relatively small cast of characters you still get
the sense that the world is really big and other things are happening in it, and millions and billions of people are
living their lives out there even though we only get a window into a few of them.

And there's a good deal of depth to the characters it does focus on and they all feel remarkably psychologically fleshed
out. All the characters feel like they have reasons for doing the things they do and believing the things they believe,
and when that inevitably brings them into conflict you can feel that they're both right, and they're both wrong, and how
most conflicts are not really the result of evil but just the result of having more than one person in the world and the
inevitable friction that causes. It's really good at getting you in the characters' heads and that makes their suffering
and their determination and their joy all the more poignant.

Just as an example of how much thought is put into not only its speculative technology but particularly the social and
political and human factors affected by said technology, there's one episode fairly early on where an engineer from a
third world country (which have it really rough in the Planetes world) is attempting to sell his product to a major
international corporation; without any spoilers I thought the way this went down was really realistic, from the rampant
corruption and war in his native country, to the first world countries discriminating against whether he could actually
make something good, to the brain drain from all the smart people in his native country getting out, to the actual
manufacturing operation itself taking place out of a run down warehouse manned by some really smart and dedicated people
and their optimism that they really could make things better for themselves and their country. It kind of reminded me a
bit of some article I read about a drone delivery company in Rwanda or something. Even heavily dysfunctional countries
have some really capable people and I thought it was a very well-thought-out portrayal of that as well as of the general
gap between rich countries and poor countries irl too. A lot of the most capable people from poor countries end up
immigrating to richer countries and have mixed feelings about it since they know this doesn't really help their native
country but it's the best decision for them. Is this good? Is it bad? It doesn't really take a side but just explores
how situations like this impact individual people. This is a recurring theme with Planetes.
* II.
Of course, I don’t think realism is a useful end goal in and of itself. Rather it’s just a springboard to use to use to
advance the themes of the show, which deal directly with the real world and the degree to which the show is grounded in
reality directly enhances how thought-provoking it is. This part is difficult to discuss without getting into spoilers;
if you don't want to be spoiled on the show you can skip to section [[III.][III]] below for some final thoughts.

.

.

.

.

.

.

#+CAPTION: Padding before spoilers below
[[./img/smokin_time.png]]

.

.

.

.

.

.

Okay, what I consider to be the fundamental conflict in Planetes, at least for much of the latter half, is the tension
between how selfish it is okay to be to achieve your dreams and how much you have to consider whether you're hurting
other people. This is explored at kind of a fractal level, from Hatimaki kind of abandoning Ai to go to Jupiter, to the
Jupiter program itself, to just in general the rich countries exploring space at the expense of the growing wealth
disparity with the poor countries. What I find interesting is how even-keeled the portrayal of this is. Space is always
portrayed pretty romantically; see all the astronauts like Gigalt and Roland who sacrifice their lives for space and for
whom dying in space is even something of an honor. At the same time, it doesn't shy away from saying just how bad things
are getting on Earth, condemning the blatant corruption of INTO, etc.

Personally I'm really peeved when people make arguments like “Why are we spending so much money on NASA when there are
still people starving on Earth!!” as if cutting the NASA budget would automatically somehow solve civil war in Mali
preventing people from accessing basic resources, or if we could immediately redirect all rocket scientists to curing
childhood cancer or something. I think people should be able to study what they want, if that's rocket science or
anthropology or even gender studies or something else with no real practical applications regardless of whether they
could have instead chosen to work in a field that brings The Greatest Good To The Greatest Number. I get really annoyed
when people suggest that all this work on things which are cool and which people like to do should be instead focused on
something else because it doesn't help solve pressing social issues on Earth. This isn't to say that solving those
things is bad, just that people should be free to do what they want instead of being morally beholden to specific
immediate cause areas.

#+BEGIN_EXPORT html
<div class="imggroup">
#+END_EXPORT
[[./img/annoyingguy1.png]]
[[./img/annoyingguy2.png]]
[[./img/annoyingguy3.png]]
[[./img/annoyingguy4.png]]
#+BEGIN_EXPORT html
</div>
#+END_EXPORT

What peeves me even more though is the opposite side when people try to justify the costs of space exporation with
arguments about how much useful technology came out of the space program in the 50s and 60s, how NASA spurred the
development of the integrated circuit, how hospitals are full of sensors and devices originally invented by NASA, etc.
This is not really false, but to me it feels like insane copium in an attempt to justify space expenditure within the
framework of “but there are still problems on Earth”. I'm not making these people up; for an example check out this
academic paper ‘[[https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10395101/][Space exploration as a catalyst for medical innovations]]’ which explicitly tries to directly map problems
in space exploration to everyday wellbeing in terrestrial healthcare. I find this pretty misguided; if you want to work
on improving the state of ‘At-risk patients with limited healthcare access’ then just work on that directly instead of
working on some space-based version that might trickle down and indirectly improve that. These people are basically just
lying to themselves because they think space exploration is cool but have the value systems of the people from the
previous paragraph that only care about whether something directly and immediately saves someone's life/advances
particular social causes. Just be honest that the reason you're doing it is because it's a really awesome thing to do.
The first people are annoying, but I think they usually earnestly want to help people; the second people are dishonest.
This is also how I feel about people who try to justify coral reef conservation or whatever under guises like how [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ziconotide][some
painkiller]] was found in cone snails once (which is nearly never used because it has to be given via direct injection
into the spinal fluid) or a [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eribulin][breast cancer drug]] was derived from a marine sponge (which has probably the most complex
synthesis of any pharmaceutical in commercial use). This is an incredibly inefficient method of drug discovery and you
should save coral reefs because they're really freaking awesome and it's good to have animals on this Earth because
they're interesting and valuable in and of themselves rather than because of what they can do for us. Anyway. Rant over.

Planetes thankfully avoids that pitfall pretty well and sticks to focusing on tackling whether this is all hopelessly
selfish or not. Space exploration in the show is driven by a small number of countries and in many cases even just a
small handful of individuals, and this does come at a cost to others. It tackles both sides of this in compelling ways.

#+BEGIN_EXPORT html
<div class="imggroup">
#+END_EXPORT
[[./img/selfishness1.png]]
[[./img/selfishness2.png]]
#+BEGIN_EXPORT html
</div>
#+END_EXPORT

I think the portrayal of characters like Locksmith (the Jupiter mission guy) and Hatimaki's father is particularly
interesting. They are objectively speaking not really good people and yet at the same time it's honestly somewhat
positive in its portrayal of them. I think it does an extremely good job of striking a balance betwen making you kinda
dislike them and at the same time respect their pursuit of the PROMETHEAN HUMAN SPIRIT. Personally I think they're very
complex characters and I find them a bit morally reprehensible in spite of the fact that I basically agree with their
goals.

I feel like there's been a bit of a resurgence in the Great Man theory of history lately, if not by actual historians
then at least as sort of a folk-history framework among laymen. At least within the current social and political climate
I feel like there's been an increased focus on the extent to which single people can shape the course of history and
(possibly just within my personal bubble) a small resurgence of discussion about authors like Nietzsche, Ayn Rand, etc,
so to a greater or lesser extent I think this framed my interpretation of characters like Locksmith in particular and
some aspects of Hatimaki's personal arc. I am personally not much of a Great Man theory supporter but what I find
interesting is you can come at Planetes from either a Great Man perspective or a people's history perspective and find
some justification for your view. It tries neither to justify Locksmith's lack of morals nor diminish his
accomplishments and similarly it neither condones the actions of the Space Defense Front nor presents their motives
entirely unsympathetically. It is ultimately less about history on a macro scale and more about its effects on people on
a very human scale.

Hatimaki himself might be the most developed character of the show and probably the one where you have the most direct
access to his internal thought processes. I'm not really happy with him either, abandoning his new wife for 7 years so
he can go to Jupiter, but at the same time in his position I'm not really sure I would choose differently. You can, at
least, understand where he's coming from and why he makes the choices he does.

And this is true on the other side too. There's an important arc later in the story revolving around a group of space
eco-terrorists who are opposed to space development in all forms and two of the major side characters get swept up with
them because they are unhappy about what the growing wealth disparty between first world and third world countries has
done to their home countries (which are poor and perpetually embroiled in civil war). And like, the terrorist group is
depicted pretty horribly. They attempted to sacrifice a city of over 100,000 people for their ends. But I can never once
say I don't understand why the aforementioned characters would go along with it. They did probably make the wrong
choice, and Claire at least recognizes that, but they made the wrong choice for very empathetic reasons.

For all this I still haven't even talked about the most important factor in the show—Ai. Ai the protagonist, and Ai as
in love.

I think Ai is basically the show's resolution to all of this. She is very idealistic, naively so, but it is precisely
this that allows her to keep on living in this harsh world. When you have people with a bold dream for the future
clashing with people who just want justice for their homeland, is ‘love’ a strong answer? A weak answer? A childlike
answer? A wise answer? But I think what she means by ‘love’ is really: empathy. Some problems can be solved with
empathy, and some can't, and there will be a winner and a loser, but don't view them as enemies or take pride in their
defeat. Try to love them, and respect them, and empathize with them, and in the end Ai really did save someone with the
power of love.

[[./img/love.png]]

I'm still not actually sure what I think of the scale expansion through the latter half of the show. We went from
collecting junk with weirdos to the Jupiter mission and terrorists and it definitely got a lot less happy and sometimes
kind of painful to watch. Stuff that starts off extremely good and comfy and then expands in scale dramatically always
makes me feel pretty weird, but I can't say I wasn't extremely emotionally invested in it. It certainly makes you
appreciate how much you were enjoying the smaller scale stuff and what you lost as the stakes get higher, but there's
also something really emotional about looking back like man how did we get here from back there. And by the end some of
the scenes are so emotionally charged you look back and the weight of everything that has happened hits you like a
truck.

#+CAPTION: I love the composition of this shot a lot
[[./img/ai.png]]

The French director François Truffaut has a quote that goes like

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
For example, some films claim to be antiwar, but I don't think I've really seen an antiwar film. Every film about war
ends up being pro-war. To show something is to ennoble it.
#+END_QUOTE

Similarly, I think Planetes can never be an anti-space-development series, or an anti-selfishly-following-your-dreams
series. It doesn't try to be anyway. It ennobles the development of space and it ennobles the just causes of people born
into unfortunate circumstances who are just fighting for a chance. Here's what I think its answer to the original
question—How selfish is it okay to be to achieve your dreams?—is:

It's okay to inconvenience others and even to hurt others. What's not okay, however, is to pretend that you're alone,
and to pretend that your actions have no effect on other people. Every action you take ripples outward through our web
of human connections. Like rain falling on the surface of a pond, it is never still, the entire surface shaking in
concert as the ripples extend outwards, interfering with each other, sometimes constructively, sometimes destructively.
You will build each other up and you will, by consequence of your actions, inevitably come into conflict with others.
And that's okay. But try to understand them. Try not to automatically find fault with them just for their conflict with
you because inside of them is a history and thoughts and motivations every bit as strong as yours. Try to understand
them, because like it or not you can't exist without them and we're all in this world together.
* III.
The other proposed etymology for /planetes/ is that it's connected to the Greek word ‘πλᾰ́ζω’ (plǎzō) of similar meaning,
and derived from the Proto-Indo-European root /*pel-/. This would make it somewhat tenuously cognate with the Russian
word ‘плёнка’ (pljónka), meaning film.

Needless to say, Planetes is really kino.

This is straight up one of the most competently written anime I've ever watched on a technical level. The script and the
direction are both insanely tight. There is no wasted time, both within an episode and between episodes as all the
episodes tie together extremely well and some things that are the crux of an earlier episode come back again later as
important background for later developments. In spite of all the arcs it goes through not a single one of them feels
weak or feels like filler. This is doubly impressive given that quite a bit of it is like… slice of life stuff? Though
it doesn't really feel fair to call it that. It's like the old joke about how if a moege is sufficiently good it becomes
a charage instead. Planetes is the charage of anime.

The way the characters are written is very reminiscent of other early 2000s otaku media to me. In some very abstract
aesthetic way it kind of reminds me a little bit of Cross†Channel. There's the particular style of banter, and the
archetypes, but most of all there's something sort of ineffable about works from that period. The atmosphere is so
melancholic and simultaneously everyone has so much will to live, and there is a deep, deep focus on HUMAN CONNECTIONS
that feels so genuine to me. It makes me so nostalgic for an era that I'm not even really sure if it ever really existed
or not; certainly I never experienced it directly. Maybe the post-bubble era in Japan was just filled with the typical
mundanities of everyday life, but there is for me at least a certain magic in works of fiction from that era and I think
Planetes encapsulates it very well.

All in all I think this is a show that will stay with me for a long time. I'm a huge fan of space media in general but
even beyond that it's a very endearing story and everything about it is so well-made, from the script, to the music, to
the directing, to the OP video which makes my heart well up with pride for humanity every time I watch it, to all the
quirky and wonderful characters just going about their lives in whatever way they can.

It's a pleasure to share this world with you, fellow human.

[[./img/alive.png]]
